= Installing Silverblue
-----------------------

The preferred way to install Silverblue is with the Fedora MediaWriter
application. See the https://silverblue.fedoraproject.org/download[Download] page
for details on how to create a USB stick to install Silverblue.

_NOTE: The following instructions are written in detail, assuming that
you have never installed Fedora before. If you have experience using or
installing Fedora, you may be able to skip much of these instructions._

[[before-you-begin]]
Before You Begin
----------------

Before you start the installation process, you should answer the
following questions:

Do you want to retain any existing data on your system?

* If yes, you should consider using the link:#manual-partition[manual
partitioning] method during the install process.
* Alternatively, if your system has an existing Fedora install on it,
you could use the xref:installing-silverblue-side-by-side[side-by-side] install
method.

Do you want to do a fresh install and do not care about retaining any
existing data on your system?

* If yes, you should consider using the
link:#automatic-partition[automatic partitioning] method during the
install process. This is the easiest way to get Silverblue installed on
your system.
* You may still use the link:#manual-partition[manual partitioning]
method during the install process, but it will require some additional
steps.

[[starting-the-install]]
Starting the Install
--------------------

After you have successfully created your USB stick, you'll need to boot
your system from the USB stick. Depending on your system, you might get
lucky and it will boot from USB automatically. Otherwise, you'll need to
figure out how to access the boot menu of your system's BIOS/UEFI and
select the USB stick as the boot device.

You should see a Fedora 30 installation screen that is identical to the
Fedora 30 Workstation installer:

image::faw-boot-menu.png[title="Fedora 30 Installer Menu"]

From this menu, you can choose to test the media to ensure that the USB
stick was created successfully. Or launch right into the installer if
you are feeling confident. For the purposes of this guide, we know our
USB stick is working properly, so we'll start the installer. You may see
some messages fly past your screen that look like this:

image::faw-boot-output.png[title="Fedora Installer Services Output"]

Eventually, the graphical installer should start and you'll be presented
with the options to select the language you wish to use during the
install:

image::faw-boot-welcome.png[title="Fedora Installer Language Selection"]

After selecting your language, the next screen of the installer allows
us to make additional selections regarding the installer. We can
configure the keyboard layout, installed language support, date and
time, networking, and partitioning. In this guide we are only going to
focus on the partitioning because of certain restrictions in this area
when using Silverblue. However, if you have questions about some of the
options of this part (or any part) of the installer, you can consult the
https://docs.fedoraproject.org/f28/install-guide/install/Installing_Using_Anaconda.html[Fedora
Installation Guide].

On this screen, you should notice that there is a warning on the bottom
of the screen that says you need to complete the items marked with the
warning icon before we can begin the actual install. Additionally, the
'Begin Installation' button is greyed out. The item that needs to be
completed is the partitioning and we can start that process by selecting
the "Installation Destination" item with the warning icon next to it:

image::faw-summary-one.png[title="Fedora Installtion Summary"]

After choosing the "Installation Destination", you are brought to a
screen where you have to decide if you want to use automatic
partitioning or manual partitioning. If you have existing data on your
disk and want to preserve it, you'll want to
link:#manual-partition[manually partition] your disk(s). However, if you
are comfortable with losing any and all existing data on your disk(s),
you can choose link:#automatic-partition[automatic partitioning]:

image::faw-storage-start.png[title="Fedora Installation Destination"]

[[automatic-partition]]
Automatic Partitioning
----------------------

If you choose automatic partitioning, your job is almost done. Select
the disk you want to install onto (in this guide we have only a single
disk). Check the radio button that says 'Automatic' and click the big
blue button at the top that says 'Done'.

If your disk already has partitions on it, you'll be presented with a
dialog to 'reclaim' space. This means you are going choose which
partitions can be deleted, so that the disk can be re-partitioned from
scratch.

image::faw-storage-reclaim.png[title="Reclaim Disks Dialog"]

In this guide, we are going to delete all the existing partitions so
that we can use the entirety of the disk for the install. This is easily
done with the aptly named 'Delete All' button.

image::faw-storage-reclaim-two.png[title="Delete All Partitions"]

And then confirm that you are going to delete all the partitions by
clicking the 'Reclaim space' button:

image::faw-storage-reclaim-delete-all.png[title="Confirming Delete All Partitions"]

With your partitioning choice complete, the installer brings you back to
the installation summary screen and the big blue 'Begin Installation'
button is beckoning you to click it. Once you click the button, your
disk(s) will be altered and all data on the disk(s) will be lost.

image::faw-summary-two.png[title="Ready to Begin Installation"]

Once you have started the install process, you can move on to the next
phase where you will link:#user-config[configure users].

[[manual-partition]]
Manual Partitioning
-------------------

When choosing to manually partition your system, you need to be aware of
certain restrictions specific to Silverblue. Due to how the operating
system and filesystem are managed via libostree, only certain mount
points can be created during the install process. These mount points are
limited to `/boot`, `/var`, subdirectories under `/var`, and the root
filesystem.

Unfortunately, the installer (which is shared with vanilla Fedora
Workstation) is not aware of these restrictions specific to Silverblue
and will happily accept your custom partitions without error. Only when
you try to boot your system will you be made aware that you have made a
mistake.

With those restrictions in mind, let's try to manually partition our
system. The first screen you'll see is the "Installation Destination"
screen. From here, you can select which disk(s) to use for the install
and choose the partitioning method. For this guide, we only have a
single disk, but you might have more than one disk in your system. In
order to select the manual parition method, click the radio button
labeled "Custom".

image::faw-storage-custom-one.png[title="Selecting Custom Partitioning"]

This will launch you into the "Manual Partioning" screen, which gives
you a minimal overview of the existing storage configuration. In order
to see all of the partitions on your disk, you should click the arrow
next to the "Unknown" disk.

image::faw-manual-partition-two.png[title="Viewing Existing Partitions"]

Now we can see that we have three existing partitions on the disk: two
`ext4` partitions and a swap partition. At this point, you should
(hopefully!) be able to recognize your existing partitions and make sure
they remain intact if you wanted to keep the existing data on your disk.
But for this guide, we do not want to preserve any data, so we are going
to start deleting all of our existing partitions to start fresh. We
start by selecting the first `ext4` partition in the list labeled
"fedora-root". Then we click the button that looks like a dash ("-") to
mark the partition to be delete. This brings up a prompt asking you to
confirm that you want to delete the partition.

image::faw-manual-partition-three.png[title="Confirm Deletion of Partition"]

Repeat this process for all the partitions that you want to delete. In
this guide, we have removed all the paritions from the system and have a
blank disk to work with.

image::faw-manual-partition-four.png[title="All Partitions Removed"]

We'll create our first partition by clicking on the button that looks
like a plus sign ("+"). This first partition will be our `/boot` where
critical pieces of software required to boot your system (like the
`initramfs` and `vmlinuz` executable). It doesn't need to be very large,
so we set the size for 500M.

image::faw-manual-partition-boot.png[title="Creating the /boot Partition"]

The only other partition we absolutely need in order for the system to
install successfully is the root partition ("/"). But we have the
flexibility to create additional partitions that can include `/var` and
subdirectories under `/var`. For the purposes of this guide, we'll
create a `/var/home` which is where all the user's home directories
live. (There is a symlink from `/home` to `/var/home` on Silverblue
systems.)

image::faw-manual-partition-varhome.png[title="Creating /var/home Partition"]

You can create additional parititions such as `/var/log` or
`/var/lib/containers`, but for this guide, we will move on to creating
the root partition. We'll finish this part of the install process by
creating the root partition for our system. We can leave the size field
blank during this step and the installer will automatically use the
remaining free space on the disk for the partition.

image::faw-manual-partition-root.png[title="Creating Root Partition"]

With all the partitions created, we can inspect the final configuration
before proceeding. It's worth noting here that the default partitioning
scheme uses
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_Volume_Manager_%28Linux%29[LVM] as
the default partitioning scheme with an `ext4` filesystem. You can
change this during this partitioning phase to use standard partitions or
an `xfs` filesystem, but that is outside the scope of this guide.

image::faw-manual-partition-complete.png[title="Partitioning Complete"]

After confirming your partitioning choices by clicking the big, blue
"Done" button at the top of the screen, you are brought back to the
"Installation Summary" screen. Here you have a chance to inspect your
choices one last time before starting the actual installation proper.
Once you click the big, blue "Begin Installation" button, your disk(s)
will be altered and any data on them may be lost forever.

Once you have started the installer, you can move on to the
link:#user-config[User Configuration] section of this guide.

[[user-config]]
User Configuration
------------------

As the installer churns away, you are presented with a screen where you
can configure the root password and create one or more regular users:

image::faw-progress-one.png[title="Configuring Users"]

Firstly, let's configure a root password. Be sure to choose a safe and
strong password that contains a mix of upper and lower case characters,
numbers, and symbols. The installer has a nice indicator during this
root password process that estimates the strength of your password; aim
for creating a password that is "Strong":

image::faw-root-pw-two.png[title="Choosing a Strong Root Password"]

Then we can create a normal, unprivileged user which we will use as our
day to day login. The same suggestions about creating a password for
this user applies. Additionally, we can choose to make the user an
administrator on the system, which grants the username the ability to
use the `sudo` command to elevate their privileges:

image::faw-user-two.png[title="Creating an Unprivileged User"]

Once we have the root password configured and an unprivileged user
configured, we just sit back and wait for the installer to complete:

image::faw-progress-two.png[title="Waiting for the Installer to Complete"]

Eventually, the installer will finish and you will be presented with a
big, blue button that says 'Reboot'. This will (obviously) reboot your
system and you'll be able to login to your Silverblue installation for
the first time!
